<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li data-se-note-number="1" id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As we have never been able to find proofs of the marriage of my ancestor Phaudrig with his wife, I make no doubt that Lyndon destroyed the contract, and murdered the priest and witnesses of the marriage. <cite>—<abbr class="name eoc">B. L.</abbr></cite> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#note-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="2" id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In another part of his memoir <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry will be found to describe this mansion as one of the most splendid palaces in Europe; but this is a practice not unusual with his nation; and with respect to the Irish principality claimed by him, it is known that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry’s grandfather was an attorney and maker of his own fortune. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#note-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="3" id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The service about which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry here speaks has, and we suspect purposely, been described by him in very dubious terms. It is most probable that he was employed to wait at the table of strangers in Berlin, and to bring to the Police Minister any news concerning them which might at all interest the Government. The great Frederick never received a guest without taking these hospitable precautions; and as for the duels which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry fights, may we be allowed to hint a doubt as to a great number of these combats. It will be observed, in one or two other parts of his Memoirs, that whenever he is at an awkward pass, or does what the world does not usually consider respectable, a duel, in which he is victorious, is sure to ensue; from which he argues that he is a man of undoubted honour. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="4" id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This manuscript must have been written at the time when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brummel was the leader of the London fashion. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#note-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="5" id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On the strength of this estate, and pledging his honour that it was not mortgaged, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry Lyndon borrowed £17,000 in the year 1786, from young Captain Pigeon, the city merchant’s son, who had just come in for his property. As for the Polwellan estate and mines, “the cause of endless litigation,” it must be owned that our hero purchased them; but he never paid more than the first £5,000 of the purchase-money. Hence the litigation of which he complains, and the famous Chancery suit of “Trecothick <abbr>v.</abbr> Lyndon,” in which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Scott greatly distinguished himself. <cite>—<abbr class="eoc">Ed.</abbr></cite> <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#note-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="6" id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From these curious confessions, it would appear that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lyndon maltreated his lady in every possible way; that he denied her society, bullied her into signing away her property, spent it in gambling and taverns, was openly unfaithful to her; and, when she complained, threatened to remove her children from her. Nor, indeed, is he the only husband who has done the like, and has passed for “nobody’s enemy but his own:” a jovial good-natured fellow. The world contains scores of such amiable people; and, indeed, it is because justice has not been done them that we have edited this autobiography. Had it been that of a mere hero of romance⁠—one of those heroic youths who figure in the novels of Scott and James⁠—there would have been no call to introduce the reader to a personage already so often and so charmingly depicted. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry Lyndon is not, we repeat, a hero of the common pattern; but let the reader look round, and ask himself, Do not as many rogues succeed in life as honest men? more fools than men of talent? And is it not just that the lives of this class should be described by the student of human nature as well as the actions of those fairytale princes, those perfect impossible heroes, whom our writers love to describe? There is something naive and simple in that time-honoured style of novel-writing by which Prince Prettyman, at the end of his adventures, is put in possession of every worldly prosperity, as he has been endowed with every mental and bodily excellence previously. The novelist thinks that he can do no more for his darling hero than make him a lord. Is it not a poor standard that, of the summum bonum? The greatest good in life is not to be a lord; perhaps not even to be happy. Poverty, illness, a humpback, may be rewards and conditions of good, as well as that bodily prosperity which all of us unconsciously set up for worship. But this is a subject for an essay, not a note; and it is best to allow <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lyndon to resume the candid and ingenious narrative of his virtues and defects. <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#note-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="7" id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Memoirs seem to have been written about the year 1814, in that calm retreat which Fortune had selected for the author at the close of his life. <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#note-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="8" id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>These exploits of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lyndon are not related in the narrative. He probably, in the cases above alluded to, took the law into his own hands. <a href="../text/chapter-19.xhtml#note-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
